[Music]
being successful almost anything means
having a passion for it if you see
somebody with even reasonable
intelligence and a terrific passion for
what they do and who can get people
around them to March even when those
people can't see over the top of the
next hill things are gonna happen I mean
I buy anything I want
basically but I can't buy time and so to
have time is the most precious thing you
can have it I better be careful with it
okay there's no way I will be able to
buy more time and living in Omaha makes
that easy that makes it a lot easier I
purchased the whatever things well then
for four years I've spent five minutes
going each way now just imagine that was
a half an hour each way I know the words
to a lot more songs it really has no if
you're doing an hour a day difference
coming and going and you know yes that's
two and a half percent of the person's
work week that means 40 here's you're
talking about a year what brings you the
most satisfaction beyond family well
most satisfaction is just staying in
good health so you're in good health
oh yeah I mean I enjoy every day I enjoy
and what is it that you enjoy well I
enjoy running Berkshire something if you
get right down into my psyche I mean ya
know it's it's you know it it's been my
painting for 50 some years I get to
paint what I want I don't have to I
don't have to do you know follow what
Wall Street is telling me to do in that
quarter or something like I got so I own
the brush I own the canvas and the
campus is unlimited and that's a it's a
pretty nice game and I get to do it
every day with people I like I don't
have to I don't have to associate with
anyone that causes my stomach to churn
you know if I were in politics I'd have
to smile a lot of people that want to
hear
to them it's really I've got a good deal
I often repeated the story brookhouser
one say to me I spent too much of my
life worrying about what people thought
of me and then I only care about what I
think of them people that I like yeah
and my business is I'm lucky that way I
mean this business is so much easier
than philanthropy fly to be maybe a
whole lot more important but in business
you're looking for kind of easy choices
you're looking for people that you can
that you like to associate with and I
mean you're to an extent I can create
the world around by saying I mean if
somebody walked in your door and they
offer they want you to buy their company
and you saw it as a golden golden goes
from I with a farmer I would say no
you'd say no but you know you knew it
would Charlie marrying for money is
probably a bad idea under any
circumstances but if you're already rich
it does not make any sense at all you
believe in America absolutely you know
you have said to me more than once I
would give up a year of my life just to
know what the next fifty is gonna be
like yeah even like for now I mean
why'd you pick for number that came to
me it's just fascinating what's happened
just in my lifetime you know 86 years I
I should mention one thing about reading
it was at the library here at Columbia I
wish I spent probably more time than any
other soon I lived there particle II but
then I pulled the book out there happen
to be who's an American that told me
something about my professor Benjamin
Graham and then I looked up and I went
to the library and I said I want to
learn more about this because I learned
this over here that changed my whole
life
you know we owned I go now because of
that library and directing me does some
other book and then following through on
that it's the chance I read about
one-fifth the pace the bill does but I
still spend five or six hours a day
reading I mean it just you can learn so
much I particularly love biography just
you know to be able to live the lives of
these people have been extorted see them
so extraordinary the lessons and those
you know the discouragements they face
just everything about it so I did you
can't get enough of reading that and I
read the book when I was 19 called the
intelligent Guster and I had been
interested in investments since I was
maybe seven or eight but I'd never and
I'd read every book in the public public
library why do you think you were
interested in investing when you were
seven or eight
because I was too dumb to get interested
in for my dad my dad had a very small
investment firm and I was just gonna
read all the books that he had there
waiting to go to lunch or whatever it
might be and then I went to the public
library metal ball and it just was a
fascinating subject to me and and but I
didn't have any I I knew but everybody
thought all of that at an early age but
the gram won't made sense to investing
per se did is there something about your
core competence that made investing the
perfect place for you to be yeah it was
a question going out all the other
allocation I was actually wired in a way
that was this would be something I would
be good at what so what wired in what
way I I can't tell you precisely but I
I've got the right temperament for it
which is more important than IQ if
you've got more than a hundred and
twenty points of IQ so sell the rest of
it somebody else you don't need it
investments but you do need the right
temperament you do it you do have to be
able to think for yourself and getting
back to you know the earlier question
the first question I asked myself when I
look at the businesses you know is it
important and easy what I can determine
about this business and a lot of them
don't make it now bill is looking for
hard questions that that plagued society
and were intellect and money may make a
difference they may not for a while and
but he's taking on the tough things I
think my job is to find easy things I'm
looking for one-foot bars to step over
you know rather than 8-foot bars to jump
over and but that's not irrational
if you're if you're looking at the
investment universe but reading is key
it on the biography on the unabled thing
I does you can learn so much my partner
Charlie Munger just loves Ben Franklin
you know I mean he I mean you know it
you can learn from other people and
their mistakes and I find biographies
might
Warren you have often said you still tap
dance to work out of here you can paint
with your own colors yeah I I get I'm as
excited about tomorrow in terms of what
is gonna happen as I was when I started
I was having a lot of fun when I started
but I'm having just as much fun now and
I was well I was here at Columbia I had
this terrible third it was impossible
for me to speak in public I mean I
wasn't able to do it I actually read an
ad in Newark times I went down to
midtown signed up for a course gave the
guy had checked and then stopped payment
on the check I mean it just I just
petrified but finally I and actually
after you get through here hearing me
today maybe you'll wish I'd stayed
afraid of public speaking but that's
another question then when I got out too
although I finally decided just had to
do it so I gave a guy a hundred dollars
in cash and once I part of another
dollars in cash I I jump off the Grand
Canyon to get my money's worth so but a
change it changed my life but I would
say this don't fear failure almost
everything that's turned out I got
turned on by Harvard do the best thing
ever happened among others some good
things that happened it seemed good at
the time don't worry about and don't
don't let it eat as you look back just
keep going because you're gonna have
some things and forget them go forward I
want to go to the back of the room right
back there
whatever number three is hi my name is
Matthew man I'm a first year at Columbia
Business School both of you
had a moment where you went out on your
own and I guess my question would be if
you were to do it all over again you're
in our shoes what industry would that be
in where would you start your own
business today I did the same thing yeah
one thing I've been failure than
anything else probably no I mean I've
had I had fun one is it my 20s my 30s
now I'm 86 I'm having fun and so I I
advise students as much as possible look
for the job that you would take if you
didn't need a job I mean you know don't
sleepwalk through life and don't don't
say it's all gonna be great you know
I'll do this and I'll do that you know
I'm just marking time to get to be older
that I've told people that's like saving
up sex for your old age I mean it just
is not a it's not a good idea yeah what
are you urging them to do just yeah
you really want to be doing what you
love doing and you can't necessarily
find it on your first job right but
don't give up before you find it the
difference between now and 60 or 70
years ago in the ability of really
bright people really innovative really
energetic people to get financed to do
the things is it's just dramatically
better than than it was at that time so
now if you've got good ideas and there's
good ideas right in this crowd and
you've got energy it's far easier to get
financed to move forward those ideas
then you couldn't 50 or 60 years is that
because of the internet Oh crowdsourcing
of what is it just lots more capital all
around and people more optimistic about
people very optimistic but better ways
to connect the capital and its dramatic
many industrial based communities have
been severely affected with higher
levels of unemployment due to the
increasing utilization of automation
which ends up displacing workers what do
you believe it what do you believe is a
possible solution to unemployment or
rising from automation how technology
and the impact technology is having on
jobs and the demand for new kinds of
skills yeah we were here at 1800 and
conducting this and somebody would point
out that eventually tractors would come
along and and better fertilizer and and
that 80% of the people are now employed
on the farm and in a couple hundred
years it's going to be two or three
percent and what are we gonna do with
all these people well the answer is we
release them
we Keynes wrote something about it in
something called essays on persuasion he
wrote in 1930 about what a more
prosperous society would become like and
he actually postulated that in a hundred
years and we're now eighty-seven years
looking though that there would be four
to eight times as much output per capita
and you know he's remarkable but he
didn't quite get how it might get
distributed but the idea of more output
per capita which is what the progress is
made on productivity that that should be
a harmful decide is crazy I mean the
distribution may be a problem but if one
person could push a button and turn out
everything we turn out now is that good
for the world or bad for the world you
know you'd have to figure out how to
distribute it but but you'd free up all
kinds of possibilities for everything
else so you every everything should be
devoted initially to getting greater
productivity but people who fall by the
wayside through no fault of their own as
the goose lays more golden age should
still get a chance to participate in
that prosperity and that's where
government comes in whether you're gonna
make an investment in a company or
whether you gonna buy the company and
what are the factors that you have to be
that you're looking for a test I'm
looking for durable competitive
advantage I'm looking for something that
has a moat around it for a considerable
period of time and I'm looking for an
honest and able management Toronto
because I don't know how to run it
myself and I'm looking for a purchase
price that's not excessive but it's
better to pay a little too much for
something that's a very good business
than it is to buy some
Arkan but really got company but not
much of a future and I don't know I
don't have a ability to predict with a
higher high probability of success the
future of most companies so I'm looking
for the exception but the nice thing is
if there's thousands of companies out
there I really only have to be right on
a couple I mean it's exactly the
opposite of a baseball where you have
called strikes and the pitchers trying
to throw it to it the worst part of the
strike zone for you and if he succeeds
in getting into that corner three times
and you don't swing you're out and and
investing it's a no it's a no cold
strike things I can sit there all day
and somebody conforming one company
after another and finally I got one of
my sweet spot both of you have chosen
both wives and partners well Charlie
Munger added what Charlie Munger changed
my views every he'd be find them in a
huge way in terms of looking for the
quality companies and and and looking
for the ability to make an investment
that would work out well for five or ten
or twenty years as opposed to something
might there might be one I call it cigar
butt investing where there was one puff
left in the cigar butt the cigar was
free so you picked up these disgusting
looking things and got one puff out of
him went on to another one and that
worked okay but it was small-scale and
it really doesn't build something
satisfying so so he he kept forcing me
in the direction of saying you know
existed a really a business we want a
home for forever and and we want to get
a so it's like a marriage I mean you
want to get associated with this person
forever and it's a great way to look at
things it's more fun with a partner I
mean Charlie and I've had more fun
working together then neither one of us
would have that individually and we have
never had an argument after working
together for 58 you could talk every day
not anymore
because we know what the other guy's
gonna say we just run well my own
personal thought is that every life is
of equal value
in many ways in many ways if you have a
limited number of dollars you actually
can do more for more people outside the
United States if we do have greater
resources here for our 320 million
people then exists around the world for
7 billion people so if you you can
improve the lot of more people by
intelligently spending a billion dollars
or any other number in other areas of
the world actually and then here and i
know i coming from omaha and having the
money i have people can say well why not
spend it all in Omaha you know you go up
here and almost done all kinds of things
for you and I absolutely acknowledge
that but in the end if I've got X
dollars to spend I can make life better
for more people if I can have it
intelligently allocated in other parts
of the world actually in the United
States and that draws a fair amount of
criticism but you know I live with it
because it's what I believe all lives
have equal value is really the driving
force for me I mean I a foundation I'm
an accident I won the ovarian artery
when I was born in the United States in
1930 it was 40 to 1 against me
I was male that now it's 80 to 1 against
being a male in the United States in
1930 I was just plain lucky my life had
been fun girl always said if I'd been
born a long time ago I'd have been some
animals lunch cuz I can't run fast and I
can't climb trees and everything no and
I'd be think I allocate capital
it wouldn't work and I was lucky but a
79 out of the 80 weren't as lucky as I
was at that time you go back 150 years
people got wealthy by making some money
from the first oil refinery or still a
mill and building another one at Henry
Ford with doable plan to build cars and
then he it would be from actually from
retained earnings which eventually
turned into cash now you can get rich
very young just by having an idea and
you can get that idea monetized and
capitalized in a way that you cannot
believe so we are particularly
interested in getting younger people
interested in flying because they there
will be huge
there are huge fortunes by people that
are now in their 20s and 30s and just
think about those the potential for that
group and so on this thing has worked
out way way better including getting
younger people to join us but are there
any major life lessons that you two have
learned through your personal
experiences well it's a very important
question and the more you will move in
the direction of the people that you
associate with so it's important
associate with people that are better
than yourself and actually the most
important decision many of you make not
all of you will be the spouse you're
choosing and you really you want to
associate with people who are the kind
of person you'd like to be you'll move
in that direction and the most important
person by far in that respect is your
spouse I can't overemphasize how
important that is you're right they're
the friends you have they will form you
as you go through life and make some
good friends keep them for the rest of
your life but have them be people that
you admire as well as Wykeham you have
said to me about Suzy your late wife I
was a mess until I met I think that's
understanding well I was a very lopsided
not well-adjusted person who happen to
be very good one
and and she put me together I mean that
and it wasn't it wasn't overnight either
I mean but she just had that little
sprinkling can yeah you know and fire
she saw he was coming together of
opposites or no no I wouldn't say that
we we have very similar valley we were
in sync they in a very big way and and
but I she was way more mature than I
wish she was nineteen one got married I
was 21 but I was I was about twelve
emotionally and and she put me together
and like I say it took time but that it
changed my life I mean I wouldn't I
would not have been a truffle anything
like the life I that and what did
Charlie Munger had well Charlie Munger
is my partner of 57 or 58 years and and
he's extremely wise he's a wonderful
friend we've been partners that time and
he's strong-minded I'm strong-minded we
disagree sometimes we have never had an
argument in that whole time and we never
will and never had an argument I will I
that's absolutely true
you must disagree absolutely we disagree
but so if you disagree how do you decide
to well what he says at the end is when
we disagree he says well Warren you'll
end up agreeing with me because you're
smart and I'm right off of these right
to say that no I I respect his opinion
enormous Lee whatever he gives it to
babe respect girls opinions I mean it's
but it's a it's more fun doing things
with partners and I mean the most fun is
obviously a marriage partner and that's
the most important relationship but what
having having a business partner if I'd
done everything undone it wouldn't
worked out this way but let's say I got
double results been more fun doing it
with Charlie are you interested in
technology III I don't have enough I
don't think I have a natural bent that
way to start with and I'd be so far
behind I never would catch up with
people with that have been working on it
and then they did it would not be a game
I would be when I was a principal
criteria for you understanding the
business yeah I have to understand the
business and there are lots of
businesses that I don't understand some
of them may be almost uh nerd
understandable and others are just
outside Maya's fear of confidence but
you do have people now that that do have
that kind of expertise who are there you
have brought in I have two people who
themselves have different circles of
competence but they are chosen because
they have a different circle learning
there's a lot of overlap there's overlap
between them and the important thing you
know is not how it's nice to have a huge
circle of competence much more important
know where the word where the limits are
of it I was genetically blessed with a
certain wiring that's very useful in a
highly developed market system where
there's lots of chips on the table and
you know I happen to be good at that
game Ted Williams wrote a book called
the science of hitting and entity had a
picture of himself at bat and the strike
zone broken into I think 77 squares and
he said if he waited for the pitch that
was really in a sweet spot he would bat
400 and if he had to swing at something
on the lure corner he would probably bat
235 and an investing I'm in a know
called strike business which is the best
business you can be and I can look at a
thousand different companies and I don't
have to be right on every one of them or
even 50 of them so I can pick the ball I
want to hit and the trick in investing
is just to sit there and watch pitch
after pitch go by and wait for the one
right in your sweet spot and the people
are yelling swing you bum ignore them
there's a temptation for people to act
far too frequently and stocks simply
because they're so liquid over the years
you develop a lot of filters but I do
know when I call my circle calm so I
stay within that circle and I don't
worry about things that are outside that
circle
defining what your game is where you're
going to have an edge is enormous ly
important
[Music]